---
title: "Therapeutic Resistance and Stemness in Mitotically Quiescent Human Breast Cancer Cells"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2018-01-10-resistance-symposium
date: 2018-01-10
venue: "Breast Cancer Research and Treatment"
paperurl: "https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-017-4585-x"
---

Contemporary evidence supports that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are the metastasis-initiating population in breast cancer. However, isolation of CSCs based on specific marker signatures is hampered by population plasticity and the lack functional significance associated with this approach. We have established a reproducible in vitro model system allowing isolation of a breast cancer sub-population with a mitotically quiescent and stem-like phenotype that exclusively contains cells capable of escaping anti-neoplastic therapy to initiate new secondary colonies. Cytofluorimetric monitoring of lipophilic fluorescent dye retention identified mitotically quiescent sub-clones (~0.05%) in monolayer cultures of five distinct human breast cancer cell lines (ER+ve and ER-ve). The quiescent population in both MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cell lines demonstrated significantly increased aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity when compared to the bulk population and was enriched for CD44+ CD24+ sub-clones. Cytotoxicity assays with doxorubicin (IC<sub>95</sub> = 0.32 µM) or paclitaxel (IC<sub>95</sub> = 20.80 nM) demonstrated increased survival in the quiescent MDA-MB-231 fraction (40.76 ± 4.60 and 102 ± 5.57%) compared with the bulk cell population (1.63 ± 0.22 and 4.56 ± 0.25%, p < 0.0001). Similar assays with doxorubicin (IC<sub>95</sub> = 2.36 µM) or paclitaxel (IC<sub>95</sub> = 46.45 nM) in MCF-7 cells demonstrated increased survival in the quiescent fraction (22.68 ± 3.31 and 24.08 ± 2.15%) compared with the bulk cell population (5.48 ± 0.92 and 6.34 ± 1.01%, p < 0.001). Quiescent cells contained a sub-population (~1%) that was able to form new colonies following cessation of treatment. This sub-population was completely eliminated following the pharmacological inhibition of oestrogen-related receptor-α (ERRα) under nutritional stress. We provide the first evidence that both MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer lines contain a latent therapy-resistant quiescent cell population enriched with CD44+ CD24+ and ALDH+ sub-clones capable of outgrowth. Further characterisation of this prospective metastasis-initiating population might yield novel therapeutic targets for elimination of the cells responsible for breast cancer recurrence.
